# How is a final grade assigned in your class?

In short, final grades in the class are determined by student self-evaluation. This evaluation is coupled with discussions of grades (and our conceptions of them) and an attempt to sketch out a general "rubric" or set of elements that might guide us in assigning a letter grade for the course.

This is the language used to provide an overview of this from my most recent English 101 syllabus:

>**Here’s where we talk grades**…

>Here’s where we talk grades…

>The assessment plan for our course involves a high degree of trust. You trusting me, and me trusting you. My promise is to trust you. And hopefully as we work together you will trust me.

>Our class will conduct assessment using a two-fold process of feedback and self-evaluation. This system is meant to value your labor and the work you do to fully engage the course. My intention in using this system is to offer each of us a chance to experience writing and learning not as a strictly finite task that is either already mastered or simply needs to be mastered, but instead as an ongoing act of dialogue, invention, risk taking, concern for others, and, yes, even failure. My intention is to facilitate as close as we can a classroom-as-studio approach in which we each play a generative role in one another’s learning.

>**Determining Final Grades**

>I'll set every assignment (big or small) to be generally assessed as "Complete" or "Incomplete." I will mark an assignment "Complete" if its submitted and generally meets any minimal requirements that were spelled out (ex: add 3 annotations and reply to 2 of your peers'). I will mark something as "Incomplete" if nothing has not been submitted. If a submission is really off the mark or something major is missing I will mostly likely mark this "Incomplete" and reach out to see how I can support your work.

>In addition to simply attempting the assignments and projects I offer you, the main way we will determine grades in this class is through self-reflection and self-assessment. As a class we will develop some baseline expectations for what we believe it means to earn a particular letter grade (i.e. “A,” “B,” “C,” etc.). We'll also get a chance to discuss the quality of our work via feedback and dialogue. The grades, then, will emerge primarily through a guided self-assessment of your learning. These are not easy to do, and I will help you as best I can to make your learning and knowledge visible.


>**Late Work**

>I'm generally flexible with late work and I accept it, so if an assignment hasn't been turned in at the deadline I don't tend to panic, and trust that the student has a good reason for a late submission. If after a couple of days past the due date an assignment still hasn't been turned in, I will mark it "Incomplete" and reach out. I'll do this just so myself and the student can track what work might be missing so we can make a plan of action for moving forward. Even if something is initially marked "Incomplete" you can still turn it in, and I'll change the status to "Complete".

>**Why I Assess the Way I Do**

>My assessment process is most likely new to you. Much of your schooling has probably done the opposite of what I attempt in this class. It most likely has emphasized points and letter grades and rankings.

>A good introduction to my assessment process can be found in this [podcast interview](https://teachinginhighered.com/podcast/ungrading/) with Susan Blum on "Ungrading." Much of what she discusses and cites here very much informs my own approach. I'll ask you to take a closer look at this podcast as we begin to write our first self-assessments/reflections, but it might also be worth a first listen now as you are getting familiar with the course.

>Grading often requires us to over-simplify the otherwise complex processes of learning, processes that require from us a commitment to experimentation, to ambiguity, to taking risks, to listening and responding.

>The challenge of writing (or composing) is that it is a highly situational activity. This means that what specifically “works” in one situation or with one reader does not necessarily “work” in another situation or with other readers. Another way of saying this is that writing and our responses to it are always highly subjective. This subjectivity is complex. This complexity is acknowledged in our course outcomes as they ask us to consider how all writing is a “purposeful response to a variety of situations and contexts as well as products of social identity (e.g., gender, ethnicity, sexuality, and social class).”

>This makes the problem of teaching and learning to write a difficult and, I think, very interesting one. Because of this difficulty we tend, as teachers and students, to rely on two basic methods. One is sometimes called “recipe swapping.” We share with each other tips and tricks and “recipes” for success. “Hey, this worked for me – try it.” The other method is usually some form of “standardization” or what might be called a “canned” approach. We approach writing as if it has a universal situation, and as if a set of hard-and-fast rules will always help us navigate this situation successfully. (For example, if you’ve ever been told to never use “I” in an essay, you’ve experienced a variation of this sort of approach.) The problem, however, with both these paths is that they tend to ignore, or at least side-step, the complexities of writing as a situational and subjective activity. What we know about writing is that what we might call “successful” writers are those that tend to become aware of the general conventions and expectations for the kind of writing they are doing -- given the purposes they have for doing it in the first place. And with this awareness these writers are better able to navigate the situational and subjective nature of their writing situations. They do this by being able to make their experiences with writing actionable. We make experience actionable via processes that encourage reflection and self-assessment.

>In this class, the goal of our assessment process is to, as best we can, try to explicitly work within both the subjective and situational experiences of writing. To do this we will rely on reflection coupled with self-assessment and feedback.  

>Hopefully this provides the start of some more clarity -- and maybe even reassurance -- if needed. Again, an assessment system like this very much requires trust. You trusting me and me trusting you. I know trust can be hard and is a process, so I'm willing to talk with you as much as you want about these things as any anxieties or challenges emerge.

# Purposes
The primary purpose for learning in my course is, I believe, to develop a better understanding of the situational nature of writing and communication. In the opening days of the course (and in the opening passages of the syllabus) I stress that the primary take away I have for the course is the concept that *writing is situational*. I assert that if at the end of our time together someone asked what you've learned, that if students can state that concept and offer an explaination for what means for them both as readers and writers then in my mind the course will have been a success.

That the concept  -- writing is situational -- is foundational to my course, there exists the possibility, I think, for doing the work of *problematizing the students' existential writing situations*. That said, I tend to frame the situational nature of writing using concepts like *rhetorical situations* (Bitzer) and/or *rhetorical ecologies* (Edbauer-Rice), which in and of themselves don't necessarily *problematize* students' situations in ways that are explicitly attuned to race. Not that race and other elements of one's social identity aren't addressed, as I believe a necessary part of understanding the situational nature of reading/writing is to learning to work from within a space of thinking about one's positionality.

This positionality piece is the primary way that I attempt to *ask students to see their own habitus next to ideal ones that assignments or other readers might imagine*. (Note: More details around this positionality work will appear in other areas of the map.)

Ultimately all of the *Why's* for writing and reading and judging this work in the class are rooted in this goal of students developing a more robust situational awareness of both their own writing and the writing of others. For example, when we read a published piece of work out in the world like Kiese Laymon's [It Took a Pandemic for Me to Understand 3 on 3 Basketball](https://nike.gallery/3x3basketball/?fbclid=IwAR0DWTOdh_Vk6Ueph7l6FrTdnj2RcXPsMX7eMj2ufNEEcmsN4datS0W_r5c) I prompt to students to read in an effort to understand the situational nature of the text and the ways/choices that writer has made (or had to live with) in how elements like context, purpose, audience, genre, and medium have coalesced into the artifact we are reading. The same goes for their own writing projects -- the most important piece is trying to facilitate students designing a writing project that is situationally aware and responds to a situational exigency. Again, there will more on this in other parts of the map, but the key idea here is that writing assignments in the class are designed less in the mode of "Write an essay that..." and more in the mode of asking the students themselves to find a purpose for writing/communicating and trying to make decisions about genre (or forms of textual action) that extend from these purposes (and sense of audience and other contextual factors).

In terms of *not penalizing* students for not being middle-class, or white, my intention is to value the students making and attempting to act on situational choices. In other words, the student writing in the class is not judged on the quality of the writing product itself, but is judged on the students' ability and willing ness to reflect on both their awareness of the writing situation and the choices they have made to navigate and participate in that situation.

# Parts

The parts that are present, developed, exchanged, and manipulated...

* *Positionality statements* written by both the teacher and the students. Initial drafts of these statements are not shared with the whole class, but used as a starting/reference point for students to begin to consider their own positionality in relation to others. For example, after drafting the initial positionality statement students are asked to annotate a reading, and one of the areas for annotation includes: "Annotate moments into the reading where you get a sense of the writer's positionality and where in the reading you sense an awareness in your own positionality in you response to or judgement of Laymon's words...Often these moments can be recognized when we in big and small ways make judgements about the work we are reading."

* *Various readings*. Students are asked to engage these readings by thinking about them situationally, or what might be called doing some rhetorical analysis of these texts. Recent examples include: zine -- ["Skurt Cobain"](https://archive.org/details/skurt-cobain-1/mode/2up)(2020), the [ALL BODIES ON BIKES Instagram](https://www.instagram.com/allbodiesonbikes/), and Kiese Laymon's [It Took a Pandemic for Me to Understand 3 on 3 Basketball](https://nike.gallery/3x3basketball/?fbclid=IwAR0DWTOdh_Vk6Ueph7l6FrTdnj2RcXPsMX7eMj2ufNEEcmsN4datS0W_r5c). (Note: Students do not write a formal rhetorical analysis or a "rhetorical analysis" essay. Instead, their presentation of their rhetorical thinking can is flexible, and can range from an informal write-up in Word, to a video recording in which they talk through their analysis. We also will respond to readings via the social annotation tool [Hypothes.is.]())

* *A research proposal*. In the course students are asked to propose a topic they would like to research for the quarter. Prior to drafting the propose, students also do some informal articulation of interests via spaces like discussion boards. Like the responses/judgements of readings the formmatting of the proposal is flexible and the primary criteria is that students build their proposal by addressing a series questions that attempts to situate their research topic and their (positional) relations to it via considerations of purpose, context, audience, and text/genre. These questions are adapted from/inspired by Marvete Lacy's [guide to reflexivity and positionality statements](https://medium.com/@Marvette/just-tell-me-what-i-need-to-know-reflexivity-and-positionality-statements-fb52ec0f4e17). It's also important to note here that it is made clear that the purpose of these proposals is not for me to "approve" or "reject" the topic -- I tend to accept all topics -- but rather to start the process of again, thinking situationally about their topic and potential project -- and this becomes a site of conversation between myself and the students and the student and others in the class about the possibilities of their project.

* *Research documentation.* Having articulated a topic, students are also asked to document their research using one of a handful of methods. Methods offered to students are a research log, an annotated bibliography, or research blog. Templates are offered for each of these possibilities and each in themselves is pretty flexible. For example, students are not expected to use a particular style such as MLA or APA, but rather the expectations for the documentation come fro the general principles of making note of the publication info of the source, summarizing the source, and trying to express the sources value to one's thinking in relation to the topic. There's no strict expectation that students will only use scholarly or academic material, but a mix of popular and academic sources are encouraged as are sources from a variety of media. Like the proposal artifact, the research documentation work is meant both to help student literally track their research work, but also to be used as a site for conversation and reflection about research processes and practices. For example, while there is no requirement that students use say MLA formatting, we do have discussion about style systems like MLA and APA and how they might factor into and shape the research and writing situation. We also will work with the self-selected readings of these research processes in the same ways -- trying to think and respond situationally to them - as we do with the various teacher assigned texts.

* *Writing Projects.* In a typical class the gaol is to have students produce 1 - 2 writing projects that emerge from their research, although this also most often manifests as a single project taken through multiple stages of development. Students participate in the design and criteria of these projects by trying to use their developing awareness of their writing situation to make decisions about the genre and other elements of the project like purpose, context, audience, etc. One of the reasons that teacher assigned readings are pull from a variety of genres (zine, essays, Instagram projects, etc.) is to introduce the possibility that a writing project does not have to conform to a traditional school-based paper or essay or the localized SAE. A first step in thinking about text/genre of the project is an element of the research proposal.

* *Reflections and self-assessments*. These are also artifacts in the course. Submissions of major elements of the course -- Research Documentation and Writing Projects -- also prompt asking students to reflect on and self-assess their work. These reflections and self-assessments are primarily grounded in the situational concepts that frame these projects. Students are asked, for example to annotate their drafts -- using Google or other tools -- and discuss the decisions they made in in composing the work. Reflections and self-assessments, will also address the idea of grades, posing questions that try to get at what specifically in a particular work -- what qualities -- would designate it as say "A" level work vs. "B" level work. We use these conversations to help extend our conversations about grades in other areas, etc.

# People
*Teacher (me):* Sets the general context for the parts of the class. Both defines general guidelines and expectations for assignments and prompts students to define sets of criteria for work both individually and collectively. May also share their own drafts of materials like positionality statements, etc.

*A Writing Center tutor:* Participates in class sessions (both online and in-person) and is available for office hours both individually and in in joint hours with teacher and course librarian.  Dialogues with students at various stages of project work. May also share their own drafts of materials like positinality statements, etc.

*A course librarian:* Participates in class sessions (both online and in-person) and is available for office hours both individually and in in joint hours with teacher and course librarian.  Dialogues with students at various stages of project work. May also share their own drafts of materials like positinality statements, etc.

*Students:* Engage in project frameworks designed by teacher. Expected to make choices regarding the development of writing and research projects/processes and reflect on choices made within these frameworks to articulate learning.

Students are specifically asked to engage in processes of developing positionality statements and reflections on grading and writing about elements of literacy hisotro and dispositions with English. I also share in the context of these conversations. Additionally, part of grounding all the project work in the goal of developing a situational awareness of ours and others writing is to contextualize our own and others judgements often in the context of our histories and dispositions with English.

# Places
Some places:

* Canvas, our institution's LMS. Canvas both creates the places for judgements (gradebook, assignment submission areas, etc.) and is created by the assessment processes. The need for discussion boards for example, is created via the need to discuss collectively (or in small groups) to say discuss our conceptions of grades, literacy histories and disposition towards English.

* Zoom. In pandemic times both whole class sessions and individual meet-ups/conferences as well as office hours are in this place. The Zoom place also involves such connected spaces as bedrooms, living rooms, cars, lap tops, hotels, phones, backyards, etc. "Break out" rooms in Zoom.

* Classrooms. My classes have consistently met in a computer lab. This on the one hand has offered a space where we can do hands on writing work in a digital space, and support each other in working with composition spaces like Google Drive or Canvas. On the other, the lab set-up makes it a bit more difficult to arrange ourselves into discussion groups as the desktop computers are spatially arranged lecture-class style. That said, we are able to get into small in-[person working groups.

* The library. Increasingly my English 101 courses have an embedded librarian, which in many ways brings the library as a place more consistently into the classroom both in-person and virtually. I wouldn't say that this presence of the library/librarian "norms" the students to a particular standard, except that it does establish that research is a "norm" within the work of a writing class at the college, while we hope also normalizes the processes of working socially with librarians.

* The writing center. Similarly, I often teach 101 courses that have an embedded tutor, which in many ways brings the Writing Center into the classroom in both physical and virtual ways. Same idea about "norm" here...one of the goals we have in using embedded tutors and librarians in these courses is that it creates "support" as a "norm" -- that it's normal to work with librarians and tutors and that these processes do not represent remediation activities.

* The web more broadly as a primary site of publication and engagement with texts.

## Writing groups.

Do students work in consistent writing groups, or different ones each week? How many students make up those places? How are those places composed or designed? Do you hand-pick in order to ensure diverse writing groups? Do students have a say in their creation, or in their on-going cultivation? How much reflection is done on the dynamics of their writing groups, and what happens with those reflections afterwards? How is trust and respect built into the writing group dynamics?

Students do work in writing groups, and the goal is to keep these as consistent as possible, with students staying in the same over the course of a project if not the entire quarter. Groups tend to be between 3 - 5 students in size, and I do not typically hand-pick them to ensure diversity. Often, groups are initially formed somewhat randomly based on the early ways that students arrange themselves in the class. As project ideas develop, I will (re)arrange groups based on some of the situational factors of the writing -- topics, purposes, genres -- and have students with somewhat resonate projects work together. I do faciliate some initial conversations around group dynamics and working with trust and respect. I also think that facilitating and making visible connections between projects can do this also.

## Failure and Success.
How is failure constructed as a place in the ecology? How often can students fail at writing (either publically or privately)? How is success constructed and how often are students positioned in the place of success? Is success public or private? Are there grades? If so, how do your grading practices construct places in which students are positioned, and then become inherent to that place? Do you offer any formal moments in the course to ask students about how failure and success are created in the class, in their writing, in their labors, or how the nature of success and failure have changed for them?

Failure tends to be constructed as a place of "did not submit." Generally, full-credit is given to all attempts at the tasks asked for, and even when a task is submitted but in someways incomplete, this does not result in a failure but rather in a conversation about the nature of the "incompleteness" and making a plan to move forward, either by redesigning the task to better fit a particular writers' need or project, or offering more guidance in the existing expectation. In the syllabus and in course conversation in general, we tend to talk of the productive "failures" of trying things out, that in our project work and drafts we may ideas, goals and intentions that we do not reach, and we talk about what this means -- how/why particular choices may or may not have contributed to a particular judgement by a reader of the writer themselves about the work/writing.

## Texts.
How are the places of texts, particularly those used as examples for discussion (either published or student texts), constructed relative to the expectations of the course, which often are a product of a white racial habitus? Are published texts used as model places only? How are those same textual places compared to (set against, set next to) the locally diverse habitus of students that organically occur in the classroom and in student writing? Is race made present in the writing and authors of published examples or “models”? Are there ways that white textual places and textual places of color might be juxtaposed so that students might problematize those places and their writer’s ethos?

I think this is an answer to this question -- my goal is always to use example texts that come from out there in the "wilds" of various places people might write/communicate. These examples might range from essays published online in magazines like Hanif Abdurraquib's [On Seatbelts and Sunsets](https://trianglehouse.squarespace.com/review/issue-four/on-seatbelts-and-sunsets) or Kaiya Gordon's [Intake Essay](https://trianglehouse.squarespace.com/review/issue-twenty/intake-essay) in Triangle House to online archives/projects the [POC Zine Project](https://poczineproject.tumblr.com/) to [The Journal of Undergraduate Multimedia Projects](https://jumpplus.net/). I think these places -- say the POC Zine Project and another database project like [The Electric Typewriter](https://tetw.org/) can be juxtaposed a means for problematizing these places and their writer's ethos.

# Power
In framing the course projects as being responses to individual writer's situations -- what their interests and commitments are -- my intention is to empower the students in coming to their own purposes, contexts, audiences and genres for writing, even if these situations differ from the dominant white racial habitus. So, in terms of power, I very much present myself as someone, not so much with a particular expertise in writing (or at least not in producing traditionally academic texts), but as someone with a reasonably developed ability or expertise to be aware of the situational nature of writing.

So I see myself has having a lot of control in designing the big picture framework of the projects -- that they will extend but students have lots of control and decisions make in the developing these projects, which are the core assessments for the course. For example, it even plays out (often) that students can decide or have control over whether they do two different writing projects or they commit to the development of single project. Sometimes a students will decide to pursue a particular path initially and take this to a draft, and then upon reflection realize their purposes and goals have changed, and they want to work in a different genre, etc. I accept this change of plans and support it. Other students will get to a an initial draft and want to continue with that path rather than say do a "Writing Project #2" -- I also support this choice. There are potentially different labor considerations in these varying oaths and these considerations become central to the discussion of how students want to proceed, and we also factor these considerations into the framing of a final self-evaluation.

The power of the final grade is rooted in the students' self-evaluation, and I continue to emphasize that I will trust the students evals. In most instances I tend to advocate to the student -- to help make visible for them -- the ways they meet course outcomes (determined by the department) as well as their own personal learning outcomes -- articulated at various points in the course and via project dialogues/feedback. These self-evaluations are coupled with a collowective development of the kinds of criteria that might help us determine an a letter grade -- how do we treat late work or missing assignments, etc.

# Processes
The two "major" processes are intertwined -- students propose and develop a research process/project that underpins the entire course and develop at least one writing project (sometimes two) from this research. These processes are designed so that if students produce the parts of these process -- produce a writing project responding to a situation of their choosing -- and documenting their research (in one of a variety of ways) they will have demonstrated work that meets the course outcomes (determined by the department). Typically the wekly work has "minor" elemnets that support these "major" processes each week and there are "check ins" for these processes, typically around the mid-term, then about 3/4's of the way through the quarter, and then final submissions of materials.

A handful of "minor" processes also are developed in the course.

* Participating in discussions of text and key concepts of the class (writing is situational, etc.) in either face-to-face groups or online forums depending on the modality, sometimes its a mix of both.
* regular reflections on work being produced, connected to the course learning outcomes and students' understanding of those as well to conceptions of grades and the kind of labor or evidence that might render those judgements viable.
* Readings -- some as part of ones research process and self-selected and some that are assigned by me in conjunction with course concepts and outcomes. In terms of assigned readings, most are designed to help students writing situations -- seeing the situational nature of others' writing and attempting to ultimately apply that thinking to their own project designs.
* Engaging with classmates work. Similiar in approach to the readings of "example" texts from out in the world -- judgements rooted in trying to better understand the situation that has produced the work of their peers.

# Products
I've always thought I could foresee the main product of my course to be a more developed sense of rhetorical awareness in the student. Again, that an enduring concept would be that writing is a situational -- social and rhetorical -- activity. Maybe another way of putting this is that I foresee students having a more expanded sense of the possibility of writing/composing as something beyond simply a transaction between teacher and student, or simply learning to write papers for school.

Direct products are the research documentation and writing projects and reflections that students produce. There is ultimately a course grade which is required by the institution. The individual assignments in the course do not receive letter grades, but are marked as "complete" or "incomplete" based on some general expectations for the assignment that might range from word counts (sometimes) to other elements or qualities that are meant to experimented with. I determine this criteria for much of the initial work; however, one part of students developing their writing projects is to do some genre research and analysis -- both individually and in groups -- to better understand the conventions and qualities typically exhibited in those form of writing. Students and myself can then develop "single-point" rubrics or list of characteristics that their writing might strive for. For example, if their is a student (or group of students) composing zines as a writing then we would spend some time in that group reading zines and doing some genre and rhetorical analysis of these example texts in order to guide our setting up of some possibilities and constraints for our students' own work.

Throughout the quarter, students are scaffolded into various discussions/reflection on their learning and development as researchers and writers with this process culminating in students self-assessing their work and making a case for their final grade. As the instructor, I work to establish (and negotiate with) students some baseline criteria from which these self-assessments are built. The assertion I make and ultimately stick to for better or worse at this point is that if a student completes all the labor asked of them in the spirit in which it is asked, then I will at a minimum trust and follow the lead of their self-assessment in terms of a final grade. If certain elements of the labor haven't been completed, I then have a discussion with the student about the ways that the labor is present makes visible their meeting of the learning outcomes in the course and how the final grade might account (or not) for the missing labor.

Some indirect (?) products of this ecology is often anxiety -- sometimes only in the initial stages as the processes become more clear, but sometimes it's prolonged. In particular, in as much as the feedback attempts to be a dialogue with the student about their work and the situational elements that offer it possibilities and constraints -- I think some students don't think the instruction in the course is didactic enough at times.
