Parts.

# Guiding questions

* What ecological parts (i.e., the codes, texts, documents, and artifacts that comprise writing assessment processes) are present, developed, exchanged, and manipulated?
* How is each part generated and agreed upon by students and teacher?
* How do the ecological parts and students’ reflections on them help students consider the course’s expectations as participating in a white racial habitus that may be different from their own?
* How might students compare non-hierarchically their own writing dispositions (their own various habitus) next to the dominant white racial habitus, not to see themselves as inferior but to see the diversity of languaging and making meaning, and perhaps to critique the hegemonic?
* How might those insights be incorporated into the purposes, processes, and products of the ecology?

*Ecological Parts...*

The parts that are present, developed, exchanged, and manipulated...

* *Positionality statements* written by both the teacher and the students. Initial drafts of these statements are not shared with the whole class, but used as a starting/reference point for students to begin to consider their own positionality in relation to others. For example, after drafting the initial positionality statement students are asked to annotate a reading, and one of the areas for annotation includes: "Annotate moments into the reading where you get a sense of the writer's positionality and where in the reading you sense an awareness in your own positionality in you response to or judgement of Laymon's words...Often these moments can be recognized when we in big and small ways make judgements about the work we are reading."

* *Various readings*. Students are asked to engage these readings by thinking about them situationally, or what might be called doing some rhetorical analysis of these texts. Recent examples include: zine -- ["Skurt Cobain"](https://archive.org/details/skurt-cobain-1/mode/2up)(2020), the [ALL BODIES ON BIKES Instagram](https://www.instagram.com/allbodiesonbikes/), and Kiese Laymon's [It Took a Pandemic for Me to Understand 3 on 3 Basketball](https://nike.gallery/3x3basketball/?fbclid=IwAR0DWTOdh_Vk6Ueph7l6FrTdnj2RcXPsMX7eMj2ufNEEcmsN4datS0W_r5c). (Note: Students do not write a formal rhetorical analysis or a "rhetorical analysis" essay. Instead, their presentation of their rhetorical thinking can is flexible, and can range from an informal write-up in Word, to a video recording in which they talk through their analysis. We also will respond to readings via the social annotation tool [Hypothes.is.]())

* *A research proposal*. In the course students are asked to propose a topic they would like to research for the quarter. Prior to drafting the propose, students also do some informal articulation of interests via spaces like discussion boards. Like the responses/judgements of readings the formmatting of the proposal is flexible and the primary criteria is that students build their proposal by addressing a series questions that attempts to situate their research topic and their (positional) relations to it via considerations of purpose, context, audience, and text/genre. These questions are adapted from/inspired by Marvete Lacy's [guide to reflexivity and positionality statements](https://medium.com/@Marvette/just-tell-me-what-i-need-to-know-reflexivity-and-positionality-statements-fb52ec0f4e17). It's also important to note here that it is made clear that the purpose of these proposals is not for me to "approve" or "reject" the topic -- I tend to accept all topics -- but rather to start the process of again, thinking situationally about their topic and potential project -- and this becomes a site of conversation between myself and the students and the student and others in the class about the possibilities of their project.

* *Research documentation.* Having articulated a topic, students are also asked to document their research using one of a handful of methods. Methods offered to students are a research log, an annotated bibliography, or research blog. Templates are offered for each of these possibilities and each in themselves is pretty flexible. For example, students are not expected to use a particular style such as MLA or APA, but rather the expectations for the documentation come fro the general principles of making note of the publication info of the source, summarizing the source, and trying to express the sources value to one's thinking in relation to the topic. There's no strict expectation that students will only use scholarly or academic material, but a mix of popular and academic sources are encouraged as are sources from a variety of media. Like the proposal artifact, the research documentation work is meant both to help student literally track their research work, but also to be used as a site for conversation and reflection about research processes and practices. For example, while there is no requirement that students use say MLA formatting, we do have discussion about style systems like MLA and APA and how they might factor into and shape the research and writing situation. We also will work with the self-selected readings of these research processes in the same ways -- trying to think and respond situationally to them - as we do with the various teacher assigned texts.

* *Writing Projects.* In a typical class the gaol is to have students produce 1 - 2 writing projects that emerge from their research, although this also most often manifests as a single project taken through multiple stages of development. Students participate in the design and criteria of these projects by trying to use their developing awareness of their writing situation to make decisions about the genre and other elements of the project like purpose, context, audience, etc. One of the reasons that teacher assigned readings are pull from a variety of genres (zine, essays, Instagram projects, etc.) is to introduce the possibility that a writing project does not have to conform to a traditional school-based paper or essay or the localized SAE. A first step in thinking about text/genre of the project is an element of the research proposal.

* *Reflections and self-assessments*. These are also artifacts in the course. Submissions of major elements of the course -- Research Documentation and Writing Projects -- also prompt asking students to reflect on and self-assess their work. These reflections and self-assessments are primarily grounded in the situational concepts that frame these projects. Students are asked, for example to annotate their drafts -- using Google or other tools -- and discuss the decisions they made in in composing the work. Reflections and self-assessments, will also address the idea of grades, posing questions that try to get at what specifically in a particular work -- what qualities -- would designate it as say "A" level work vs. "B" level work. We use these conversations to help extend our conversations about grades in other areas, etc/

# Rubrics

How are the expectations of writing (e.g., assignment instructions, assignment processes, and rubrics) created and revised? Do students have a say in their creation or revisions? What does the artifact that embodies expectations in writing look like? What do students do with it? What does the teacher do with it? How is the articulation of the rubric such that it calls attention to its own participation in a white racial habitus, or others?

# Discourse of Assessment and Judgment.

How do you ensure student participation in developing the codes of assessment and judgment, the ways that writing is talked about, reflected upon, made sense of, and theorized in the class? In what formal ways do students reflect upon the codes and artifacts of assessment, not their drafts, but the discourse around their drafts, feedback, dialogue, rubrics, etc.? How is that reflecting informed by any pertinent literature on whiteness and race, feedback to writing, or composition theory? How is their reflecting used to help students problematize their existential writing assessment situations?

# Texts.

What student-generated texts are expected? How are students involved in creating the general expectations for their texts? What are those texts expected to look like? What are readers expected to do with them, or how do students read in order to make judgments? What assessment texts (or texts that articulate judgments of peers’ writing) are students expected to produce and what do they look like? How are they produced? Will the teacher produce the same kind of assessment texts? What do students do with their assessment texts? How do they function in writing groups or in class discussions? How much free- dom do students have in deviating in form, format, or content of the texts they are asked to produce? Are there discussions that set up those conversations if and when students do deviate from expected forms, formats, or content?
