Products.  
# Guiding Questions
* What products or consequences do you reasonably foresee the ecology producing?
* What direct products are there? Will there be a course grade, or even individual grades on drafts?
* Will there be decisions about proficiency, placement, learning, development, or passing that must be made at the end of the course?
* What indirect products might there be and how might these products change given different locally diverse students? In what ways are those products fair and unfair to produce?

I've always thought I could foresee the main product of my course to be a more developed sense of rhetorical awareness in the student. Again, that an enduring concept would be that writing is a situational -- social and rhetorical -- activity. Maybe another way of putting this is that I foresee students having a more expanded sense of the possibility of writing/composing as something beyond simply a transaction between teacher and student, or simply learning to write papers for school.

Direct products are the research documentation and writing projects and reflections that students produce. There is ultimately a course grade which is required by the institution. The individual assignments in the course do not receive letter grades, but are marked as "complete" or "incomplete" based on some general expectations for the assignment that might range from word counts (sometimes) to other elements or qualities that are meant to experimented with. I determine this criteria for much of the initial work; however, one part of students developing their writing projects is to do some genre research and analysis -- both individually and in groups -- to better understand the conventions and qualities typically exhibited in those form of writing. Students and myself can then develop "single-point" rubrics or list of characteristics that their writing might strive for. For example, if their is a student (or group of students) composing zines as a writing then we would spend some time in that group reading zines and doing some genre and rhetorical analysis of these example texts in order to guide our setting up of some possibilities and constraints for our students' own work.

Throughout the quarter, students are scaffolded into various discussions/reflection on their learning and development as researchers and writers with this process culminating in students self-assessing their work and making a case for their final grade. As the instructor, I work to establish (and negotiate with) students some baseline criteria from which these self-assessments are built. The assertion I make and ultimately stick to for better or worse at this point is that if a student completes all the labor asked of them in the spirit in which it is asked, then I will at a minimum trust and follow the lead of their self-assessment in terms of a final grade. If certain elements of the labor haven't been completed, I then have a discussion with the student about the ways that the labor is present makes visible their meeting of the learning outcomes in the course and how the final grade might account (or not) for the missing labor.

Some indirect (?) products of this ecology is often anxiety -- sometimes only in the initial stages as the processes become more clear, but sometimes it's prolonged. In particular, in as much as the feedback attempts to be a dialogue with the student about their work and the situational elements that offer it possibilities and constraints -- I think some students don't think the instruction in the course is didactic enough at times.

# Discussion.
How is the subject position of the writer discussed in or around student texts? How is learning and development discussed? How is that learning or development compared to formal expectations of the course? Are those expectations explicitly associated with a white racial habitus as such? In feedback activities (with the teacher or among students) what responses to feedback might student-writers reasonably have? What opportunities do writers have to respond back to readers or assessors of their writing? How are those responses fed into students’ articulations of learning?
# Products of Other Ecological Elements.
What effects or consequences might the kind of ecological part used to articulate judgments on students’ writing have on various locally diverse writers, or in writing groups that may discuss them? How might those ecological parts or processes have historically racialized consequences for your students, patterns that students intuitively have accepted or not questioned? Could some racial formations in your classroom have different experiences than what you reasonably hope for or expect, and thus learn something very different from the same ecology? How might the class monitor these differences? How can this alternative learning be acknowledged? How would you measure these unintended consequences (learning) or observe them? How might students be involved in measuring or observing them (e.g., reflections that ask about their learning and its relation to their past ways of learning)?
