Consider your teaching and course planning in a typical ENGL&101 course of yours. Take a few notes in a separate notes document. Or you can also make this a new project in PowerNotes. Be sure to enable the Time Management feature in this project too. This may make your ideas more accessible to you and provide a better way to brainstorm. In your notes, make three lists or three topics (in PN): (20 minutes)

## What are your main or primary attitudes and values that make you as a teacher in the course?

* writing is situational
* all people and communities engage in writing/communication to make meaning (writing is a social and rhetorical activity)
* You can trust students.

## What typical behaviors and practices define your work as a teacher who assesses students' languaging in that course?

* I try to establish a space where students design their own languaging work around a developing sense of purpose, audinece, context etc. I've always tried to foregraoud the notion of *rhetorical situations* or *rhetorical ecologies* in my work. I haven't typically used the word "languaging"...I've taken this from Asao's text as I find it intriguing and potentially useful as a thinking tool. I probably would have used the word "projects" in the past...although I also have noted that "projecting" is a tern that comes up in Asao's work as well.

## What common or typical materials, texts, and resources do you draw on as a teacher that inform your assessing? These may be things you share with students or things from your own training, such as theories, authors, mentors, or courses you took that you found inspiration from.

* In framing assessing for students -- which is a continually evolving labor-esque method that increasingly relies on self-assessment and reflection have I started sharing with just resources as [Jesse Stommel's blog writings about grading](https://www.jessestommel.com/ungrading-an-faq/), and the work of folks like Susan Blum, this [podcast on ungrading](https://teachinginhighered.com/podcast/ungrading/) in particular.

* These works were not a part of my formal training, but are things I've gathered in the process of my DIY professional development.

* In fact, I don't recall there being much work around assessment when I was in graduate school. I was encouraged to experiment with Danielewicz's and Elbow's conception of contract grading (Danielewicz was a professor in my grad program), and that work is what led me, in part, to Asao's book on antiracist assessment ecologies.

* From a broader composition studies perspective, my teaching has been most informed by the work of Jody Shipka, in particular her work in *Toward a Composition Made Whole*, as well as Paul Lynch's *After Pedagogy: The Experience of Teaching*, which I've found really helps me continually think though the intersections of my Deweyian/pragmaticist leanings and my what I've been drawn to in the post-pedgagogical work from the like Vitanza, et. el. IN graduate school my mentors where Jaqueline Rhodes and Danial Anderson, who both encouraged and further developed my, what I'd call expanded sense of *writing* and *composing* I think this is relevant to our current work, because my teaching has always embraced asking students to work in a variety of media and genres, which very early on  prompted me to wrestle with notions of assessment and grading in productive ways.


Be sure you have three lists or topics that you’ve filled with ideas.

Look over your lists or topics in PN and consider a few questions. Use these questions to help you think bravely and critically about who you are as a teacher and judge of student languaging in your ENG&101 courses. The questions are: (10 minutes)

## Which list of the three is longer? What do you make of that? Since you used that kind of list primarily to describe yourself initially, there could be something about that kind of list that you find valuable or meaningful when thinking about yourself as a teacher and assessor.

The list about the materials and influences is longer. I think this is in part because because I really enjoy engaging with the scholarship of composition studies, even I myself don't have much desire to actively publish, etc. I also think a part of this is that I like the challenge of trying to put theory into practice so to speak. I'm not sure how to say this actually. Maybe it has something to do with my personality as tinkerer or experimenter -- I'm an "early adopter" so to speak. I'm pretty comfortable with ambiguity and paradox and in my teaching I've never felt I had to have everything figured out in advance, or that a theory of composing or pedagogy had to have some very immediate or clear application to be useful or applicable to the helping one design and work on their pedagogy. So I suppose that list of materials, influences, and mentors does say a lot about me in that regard.


## Which list is the shortest? What do you make of that?

The behaviors list is short and isn't really a list I guess, just one thing -- that I try to design my class around students coming to an awareness of the writing situations they are already connected to or might be connected to. I guess my sense of any behaviors -- like letting students choose their own research topics or often co-developing project rubrics/expectations -- are all behaviors that would emerge from within the starting point of the design context. For example, if one designs their class around a situational awareness of composing -- and having students develop this and respond to it -- that necessitates particular behaviors, so I think I have a tendency to think about teaching and learning for a starting point of context and big picture goals.

## What role does your own subjectivity play in these lists or your original narrative.

Using your notes document or PN project, draft your teaching and assessing inventory. Please use the dimensions listed below as sections. Each section only needs to be a paragraph, maybe 100-150 words, but write what feels right at this time. There are eleven sections, so your inventory should be around 1,100-1,650 words in total length. But be as complete as possible. If you find that you don’t have answers for a dimension below, just say so. If you only have questions about that dimension, then ask those questions there. If you need more words to explain, take them. If you don’t need as many words, use the amount you need. Consider yourself as the main audience of this inventory. (120 minutes)

# Attending to Subjectivities: How do you explicitly pay attention to the subjectivities in the classroom in your teaching, assignments, and/or assessing?

In the past year or so, I've started experimenting with positionally statements in the context of the class. My sense of the importance of positiinality comes, in part, from [the work of Malea Powell (et al)](http://enculturation.net/21). I draft one for myself that students can comment on and I ask the students themselves to draft one. These drafts initially remain private, or can be shared more broadly if students wish. I then try to find ways to revisit these initial positionality statements -- my own and the students' -- in the context of the work we're doing in reading and writing projects. This positionality work is coupled with what are generally pretty open ended projects that are driven by both students' interests/goals and what I hope is their developing awareness of the situational nature of all writing/languaging/compsiing.

# Attending to Racial Politics of Language and Its Judgement: How do you pay attention to the racial politics of students and their languaging in the classroom and in your assessment of their work? What does it mean to pay attention to the racial politics of language and how it’s judged in your classroom?

As I described in my "theory" of writing assessment I try to root the judgements we make about writing in the situational/ecological nature of not just composing in general but within specific acts of composing. And our engagement with questions of situation is often done through description and self-reflection/assessment -- and trying to get at what has motivated the rhetorical choices a student/writer makes in a particular piece of writing or languaging. Again, my primary pedagogical goal is for students to develop a more attuned situational awareness in relation to the possibilities of their writing. IN many ways I see it as being a kin to Asao's notion of "problematizing one's own existential writing situation" although I don't think I've foregrounded the problematizing in the same ways that he has. In this sense, I've done much less attending to the racial politics of language and its judgment, although I do think I have a pedagogical intention that could very much embrace that more. Part of the "situational awareness" piece of my teaching has been to open questions of quality to discussion within the classroom. This ranges from why we might view certain grammatical conventions as "correct" or "proper" to other issues like text being "thesis driven" to the role of the personal in research and writing. I know that I don't always foreground the racial politics of these things as much as could, or perhaps it's better to say that I certainly struggle with the foregrounding of racial politics.


# Compassion: What does “compassion” mean to you as a teacher and what role does it play in your teaching or classroom? What does it look like in your classroom? Do you talk explicitly about it with students? Do you expect them to be compassionate as well? In what ways?

I've started using the phrase -- "lead with care in every instance" -- which I picked up from a syllabus written by Jentry Sayers. I think that's what compassion means to me as a teacher. I use this phrase in the context of work load and how we'll manage it. *leading with care* most immediately takes the form of flexibility and recognizing when we both individually or collectively need to make adjustments in our plans. It most readily takes the form of having flexible deadlines for assignments, but also extends to flexibility in adjusting our intentions for a project as things emerge for us in the process of developing it. I do articulate this in the syllabus and include reminders of it in weekly communications in the class.

I also think that this *leading with care* extends to valuing the richness and diversity of language practices. I articulate in the syllabus like this -- "Creating this environment includes my commitment to value the diversity and richness of our language practices. School for many is often a place where judgements about language have been harnessed to both intentionally and unintentionally marginalize people and set-up barriers to success. The composition classroom is a place where we can begin to more critically understand how language plays a role in issues of inclusion/exclusion and power/empowerment in the world." I do try to make this a recurring point as we develop projects that involve our *languaging*. The idea is to approach language and out judgement of it with care. So in this way I think I have an expectation that students practice compassion in this sense to lead with care in situations where we are responding to and working with others.


# Collaborative Processes and Negotiation: What role does collaboration and negotiation play in your classroom with students, particularly around how things are taught and how language is assessed, even graded?

This happens in a variety of ways. Perhaps the primary is that students are given the freedom to design their own projects. The idea here is that they develop a project that responds to a writing situation that they themselves are already in way way connected to or a part of. These situations vary, and we develop our awarenesses of them through collaboration with me and other students, and we negotiate the expectations for the projects (including grades) together. In many ways this happens through a series of self-reflection and assessment activities that hopefully offer me a chance to dialogue with students about emerging purposes and context for their writing, etc. Even in situations where I might offer students some more defined project paths -- *Make a Zine!* for example -- the processes of developing what a particular writer's Zine project might look like involves more collaboration and negotiation between myself and the students than any sort of prescriptive move on my part.



# Antiracist Purposes and Goals: What antiracist purposes and goals do you tend to have for your assessments of student languaging (essays and other language work)? What purposes and goals do you have for your grading system(s)? Explain them and how you explain them to your students. How are they antiracist in their orientation?

So, to offer a glimpse of current goals for assessment, I will share the current language from my syllabus:

> **Here’s where we talk grades…**

> The assessment plan for our course involves a high degree of trust. You trusting me, and me trusting you. My promise is to trust you. And hopefully as we work together you will trust me.

> Our class will conduct assessment using a two-fold process of feedback and self-evaluation. This system is meant to value your labor and the work you do to fully engage the course. My intention in using this system is to offer each of us a chance to experience writing and learning not as a strictly finite task that is either already mastered or simply needs to be mastered, but instead as an ongoing act of dialogue, invention, risk taking, concern for others, and, yes, even failure. My intention is to facilitate as close as we can a classroom-as-studio approach in which we each play a generative role in one another’s learning.

> **Determining Final Grades**

> I'll set every assignment (big or small) to be generally assessed as "Complete" or "Incomplete." I will mark an assignment "Complete" if its submitted and generally meets any minimal requirements that were spelled out (ex: add 3 annotations and reply to 2 of your peers'). I will mark something as "Incomplete" if nothing has been submitted. If a submission is really off the mark or something major is missing I will mostly likely mark this "Incomplete" and reach out to see how I can support your work.

> In addition to simply attempting the assignments and projects I offer you, the main way we will determine grades in this class is through self-reflection and self-assessment. As a class we will develop some baseline expectations for what we believe it means to earn a particular letter grade (i.e. “A,” “B,” “C,” etc.). We'll also get a chance to discuss the quality of our work via feedback and dialogue. The grades, then, will emerge primarily through a guided self-assessment of your learning. These are not easy to do, and I will help you as best I can to make your learning and knowledge visible.


>**Late Work**

> I'm generally flexible with late work and I accept it, so if an assignment hasn't been turned in at the deadline I don't tend to panic, and trust that the student has a good reason for a late submission. If after a couple of days past the due date an assignment still hasn't been turned in, I will mark it "Incomplete" and reach out. I'll do this just so myself and the student can track what work might be missing so we can make a plan of action for moving forward. Even if something is initially marked "Incomplete" you can still turn it in, and I'll change the status to "Complete".

>**Why I Assess the Way I Do**

> My assessment process is most likely new to you. Much of your schooling has probably done the opposite of what I attempt in this class. It most likely has emphasized points and letter grades and rankings.

> A good introduction to my assessment process can be found in this [podcast interview](https://teachinginhighered.com/podcast/ungrading/) with Susan Blum on "Ungrading." Much of what she discusses and cites here very much informs my own approach. I'll ask you to take a closer look at this podcast as we begin to write our first self-assessments/reflections, but it might also be worth a first listen now as you are getting familiar with the course.

> Grading often requires us to over-simplify the otherwise complex processes of learning, processes that require from us a commitment to experimentation, to ambiguity, to taking risks, to listening and responding.

> The challenge of writing (or composing) is that it is a highly situational activity. This means that what specifically “works” in one situation or with one reader does not necessarily “work” in another situation or with other readers. Another way of saying this is that writing and our responses to it are always highly subjective. This subjectivity is complex. This complexity is acknowledged in our course outcomes as they ask us to consider how all writing is a “purposeful response to a variety of situations and contexts as well as products of social identity (e.g., gender, ethnicity, sexuality, and social class).”

> This makes the problem of teaching and learning to write a difficult and, I think, very interesting one. Because of this difficulty we tend, as teachers and students, to rely on two basic methods. One is sometimes called “recipe swapping.” We share with each other tips and tricks and “recipes” for success. “Hey, this worked for me – try it.” The other method is usually some form of “standardization” or what might be called a “canned” approach. We approach writing as if it has a universal situation, and as if a set of hard-and-fast rules will always help us navigate this situation successfully. (For example, if you’ve ever been told to never use “I” in an essay, you’ve experienced a variation of this sort of approach.) The problem, however, with both these paths is that they tend to ignore, or at least side-step, the complexities of writing as a situational and subjective activity. What we know about writing is that what we might call “successful” writers are those that tend to become aware of the general conventions and expectations for the kind of writing they are doing -- given the purposes they have for doing it in the first place. And with this awareness these writers are better able to navigate the situational and subjective nature of their writing situations. They do this by being able to make their experiences with writing actionable. We make experience actionable via processes that encourage reflection and self-assessment.

> In this class, the goal of our assessment process is to, as best we can, try to explicitly work within both the subjective and situational experiences of writing. To do this we will rely on reflection coupled with self-assessment and feedback.  

> Hopefully this provides the start of some more clarity -- and maybe even reassurance -- if needed. Again, an assessment system like this very much requires trust. You trusting me and me trusting you. I know trust can be hard and is a process, so I'm willing to talk with you as much as you want about these things as any anxieties or challenges emerge.

While I assume that the above system and rationale potentially leads to antiracist outcomes, I don't know if I would claim it's antiracist in it's intent, except, again I think this sort of approach, which I've been using for a while in varied forms, has antiracist potential.  It's potentially antiracist in its orientation in at least two way I think. First, it doesn't presume a single standard exists for defining what good writing is or can be. Second, I think the admission/acknowledgment of trust being central to assessment work aligns with the antiracist idea that *none needs developing* within a particular, pre-defined standard or situation (which in higher education has history been defined within a white habitus). I make no mention of antiracism in this overview. My worry is that I don't want to use a label like antiracism lightly, particularly in a context in which our institution is trying to label everything as antiracist...

# Measuring Success by Antiracist Outcomes: How do you measure success for your antiracist purposes and goals? How do you know when you have succeeded at being antiracist and how do you know where you need to improve or change your practices?

I actually do not know that I can claim success in this area. We do have access to course completion (and subsequent course completion) data at my institution which is always used -- often problematically as a measure of what the institution is increasing labeling as antiracist outcomes. So, perhaps, I would say that if my course completion data shows that students of color are passing my course is rates equitable to white students, then I am meeting some sort of antiracist outcome. My own lack of experience and knowledge of working with data makes me skeptical of this as a sound measure. I do think that as my teaching has increasingly involved intentionally trying to come to a sense of students' positionality, that I have a somewhat sense of success in that if a students who has identified as someone that has been marginalized in their language use, particularly in the context of school, and they are able to successfully meet both their personal learning goals and the outcomes of the course -- this feels successful. Given that the grades in my courses are determined primarily by student reflection and self-evaluation (and trusting those) I have that as a resource for gauging learning and how students perceive their own learning in the class even despite what might be more directly visible within the context of project. 

# Engagement in Conflict and Difference: In what ways do you engage in, avoid, deflect conflict or difference in your classrooms with students? This is not just in conversations but also in papers and writings, in feedback practices among peers, in texts you read. How do you frame conflict? How do you structure activities in order to encourage it or avoid it?

# Incorporating Materials from BIPOC Voices: How do you incorporate materials from BIPOC voices in your classroom? What is the ratio of white authors to BIPOC authors in your last 2-3 courses? What ratio do you think is best and why? What things do you consider when making these kinds of curricular decisions?

# Resisting Hierarchical Logics: How do you resist hierarchical logics in your grading systems, assignments, lessons, feedback, etc.? How does such ranking logics function in your past grading systems and in the way you create assignment sequences, lesson plans, etc.? Are there different logics or assumptions that govern your use of hierarchical logic in each case?

# Incorporating Racial Theories and Histories: What racial theories do you use to help you create curricula, assignments, and assessment methods/practices? List the most prominent theories, ideas, and authors. If you don’t use any racial theories explicitly, why do you not do this? What has been in your training or conditions that has kept you from doing so?

# Focusing on Diverse Ways of Laboring: How do you account for the various ways of learning and laboring in your classroom that will produce, say, different kinds of text from the same instructions or expectations for writing? What do you understand as the various ways of laboring possible in most of your courses? What happens when you have some “slower readers” in a course, ones who are say multilingual speakers of English and other languages? Do you expect the same reading labors from them as you do from your monolingual English speaking students? Explain how you account for such diverse laboring in your assessment systems.
